= NEWS

== 1.1.0: 2011-02-09

=== Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.1.0.
* Added Groonga::Plugin.register.

== 1.0.9: 2011-01-29

=== Improvements

* Supported gem creation on Windows.
  [Patch by ongaeshi]
* Supported generated directory that is created by Groonga::Schema removal
  when table or column is removed.
* Added Groonga::Context#create_database.
* Added Groonga::Context#open_database.
* Added Groonga::Column#indexes.
* Supported a notation for specifying index column as match target in
  Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.match("query") do |match_record|
        (match_record.index("Terms.title") * 1000) |
          (match_record.index("Terms.description") * 100)
          match_record.content
      end
    end
* Supported prefix search in Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.name.prefix_search("groo")
    end
* Supported suffix search in Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.name.suffix_search("nga")
    end
* Supported :default_tokenizer schema dump.
* Supported :key_normalize schema dump.
* Supported pseudo columns by Groonga::Table#have_column?.
* Supported pseudo columns by Groonga::Record#have_column?.

=== Changes

* Renamed Groonga::Operatoion to Groonga::Operator.
  (Groonga::Operation is deprecated but still usable.)

=== Fixes

* Fixed a crash bug when not default Groonga::Context is used in
  Groonga::Table#select.
* Fixed a crash bug when an exception is occurred.

=== Thanks

* ongaeshio

== 1.0.8: 2010-12-25

=== Improvements

* Improved Groonga::Schema's n-gram tokenizer detect process.

=== Fixes

* Fixed GC problem caused by match_target in select.

== 1.0.7: 2010-12-19

=== Fixes

* Supported pkg-config installed by RubyGems on Ruby 1.8.
  [Reported by @kamipo]
* Fixed a memory leak in Groonga::Table#columns.

=== Thanks

* @kamipo

== 1.0.5: 2010-11-29

=== Improvements

* Added snail_case type name aliases for built-in groonga types
  to Groonga::Schema.

=== Fixes

* Fixed a crash bug on GC. [Ryo Onodera]

== 1.0.4: 2010-11-29

=== Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.0.4.
  * Added Groonga::UnsupportedCommandVersion.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_sub_records?.
* Added Groonga::Record#eql?とGroonga::Record#hash.
  (treat two the same table and the same record ID object as the same Hash key.)
* Supported pkg-config gem.
* Supported generic #record_id object handle for custom record object
  in Groonga::Table#select.
* Added Groonga::Record#record_id.
* Added Groonga::Table#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Column#reference_key?.
* Added Groonga::Column#index_column?.
* Added Groonga::Schema#dump.
* Supported multi columns index creation in Groonga::Schema.
* Supported meaningful path in Groonga::Schema.
* Made reference table omissible when index column definition
  in Groonga::Schema.
* Added Groonga::Schema.remove_column.
* Added convenience timestamps methods to define "created_at" and
  "updated_at" columns in Groonga::Schema.
* Added Groonga::Context#support_zlib?.
* Added Groonga::Context#support_lzo?.
* Added Groonga::Database#touch.
* Added Groonga::Table#exist?.
* Added Groonga::Record#valid?.
* Added Groonga::Column#vector?.
* Added Groonga::Column#scalar?.
* Added Groonga::Record#vector_column?.
* Added Groonga::Record#scalar_column?.
* Accepted any object that has record_raw_id method for record ID required
  location. Groonga::Record isn't required.
* Added Groonga::Record#record_raw_id.
* Accepted any object that as to_ary method for reference vector column value.

== Changes

* Used :key as the default value of :order_by of
  Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_cursor.
* Removed a deprecated Groonga::TableKeySupport#find.
* Used ShortText as the default key type of
  Groonga::Hash#create and Groonga::PatriciaTrie#create.
* Renamed Groonga::Schema#load to Groonga::Schema#restore.
* Supported pkg-confg 1.0.7.
* Added Groonga::Column#index? and deprecated Groonga::Column#index_column?.
* Added Groonga::Column#reference? and deprecated
  Groonga::Column#reference_column?.

=== Fixes

* Fixed index for key isn't be able to define.
* Fixed a crash problem on GC.

== 1.0.1: 2010-09-12

=== Fixes

* Fixed wrong flag used on creating a table.
  [Reported by ono matope]

=== Thanks

* ono matope

== 1.0.0: 2010-08-29

* Supported groonga 1.0.0.
  * Added Groonga::CASError.
  * Added :order_by option to Groonga::Table#open_cursor.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_prefix_cursor that creates a cursor
    to retrieve each records by prefix search.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_rk_cursor that creats a cursor to
    retrieve katakana keys from roman letters and/or hiragana.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_near_cursor that creates a cursor to
    retrieve records order by distance from key.
* Supported _key as index source.

== 0.9.5: 2010-07-20

* Supported groonga 0.7.4.
* Imporoved Groonga::Table#select:
  * Supported weight match:

    Here is an example to match source column or title column and
    title column has high score:
      table.select do |record|
        (record.title * 10 | record.source) =~ "query"
      end
  * Supported and representation for and conditions:

    Here are examples that represents the same condition:
      table.select do |record|
        conditions = []
        conditions << record.title =~ "query"
        conditions << record.updated_at > Time.parse("2010-07-29T21:14:29+09:00")
        conditions
      end

      table.select do |record|
        (record.title =~ "query") &
          (record.updated_at > Time.parse("2010-07-29T21:14:29+09:00"))
      end
* Provided groonga runtime version: Groonga::VERSION
* Added Groonga::Table#support_sub_records?
* Supported pagination: Groonga::Table#paginate, Groonga::Pagination

== 0.9.4: 2010-04-22

* Fixed release miss.

== 0.9.3: 2010-04-22

* Fixed release miss.

== 0.9.2: 2010-04-22

* Supported groonga 0.1.9.
* Many.

== 0.9.1: 2010-02-09

* Supported groonga 0.1.6

== 0.9.0: 2010-02-09

* Supported groonga 0.1.5
* Added API
  * Groonga::Object#context
  * Groonga::Record#n_sub_records
  * Groonga::Context#send
  * Groonga::Context#receive
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#prefix_search [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#path [Ryo Onodera]
  * Groonga::Object#lock [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#unlock [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#locked? [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#temporary?
  * Groonga::Object#persistent?
  * Groonga::ObjectClosed
  * Groonga::Context.[]
  * Groonga::Table#column_value
  * Groonga::Table#set_column_value
* Changed API
  * Groonga::Table#select, Groonga::Column#select
    * They also accept Groonga::Expression
    * Added :syntax option that specifies grn expression syntax
  * Groonga::Table#open_cursor
    * Added :offset option that specifies offset.
    * Added :limit option that specifies max number of records.
  * Changed Groonga::Expression.parse options:
    * (nil (default) -> :column) -> (nil (default) -> :query)
    * :column -> removed
    * :table -> :query
    * :table_query -> :query
    * :expression -> :script
    * :language -> :script
  * Groonga::Table#define_column, Groonga::Table#define_index_column
    * Defined column becomes persistent table by default
  * Groonga::Table#[] -> Groonga::Table#value
  * Groonga::Table#[]= -> Groonga::Table#set_value
  * Groonga::Table#find -> Groonga::Table#[]
  * Groonga::Table#find -> obsolete
  * Groonga::Table#[]= -> removed
  * Groonga::TableKeySupport#[]= is alias of Groonga::TableKeySupport#add
  * Changed exception class to Groonga::NoSuchColumn from
    Groonga::InvalidArgument when Groonga::Record accesses nonexistent
    a column.
* Bug fixes
  * Fixed a bug that context isn't passed to schema [dara]
  * Fixed a bug that Groonga::PatriciaTrie#tag_keys doesn't return
    that last text.
    [Ryo Onodera]
* Added --with-debug option to extconf.rb for debug build.
* Fixed a bug that Ruby 1.9.1 may fail extconf.rb.

=== Thanks

* dara
* Ryo Onodera
* Tasuku SUENAGA

== 0.0.7: 2009-10-02

* Supported groonga 0.1.4
* Added API
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#scan
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#tag_keys
  * Groonga::Expression#snippet
  * Groonga::Object#append
  * Groonga::Object#prepend

== 0.0.6: 2009-07-31

* Supported groonga 0.1.1.
* Fixed documents [id:mat_aki]
* Supported groonga expression for searching.
* Added API
  * Groonga::Table#union!
  * Groonga::Table#intersect!
  * Groonga::Table#differene!
  * Groonga::Table#merge!
* Provided tar.gz [id:m_seki]
* Fixed memory leaks

== 0.0.3: 2009-07-18

* [#26145] Added Groonga::TableKeySupport#has_key? [Tasuku SUENAGA]
* [#26146] Groonga::Record#[] raises an exception for nonexistent
  column name. [Tasuku SUENAGA]
* Supported 32bit environment [niku]
* Added a test for N-gram index search [dara]
* Added APIs
  * Groonga::Record#incemrent!
  * Groonga::Record#decemrent!
  * Groonga::Record#lock
  * Groonga::Table#lock
  * Groonga::Schema: A DSL for schema definition
  * Groonga::Expression

== 0.0.2: 2009-06-04

* Supported groonga 0.0.8 [mori]
* Improved preformance: cache key, value, domain and range
* Improved API
* Added documents
* Supported Ruby 1.9
* Bug fixes:
  * Fixed install process [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Fixed memory leaks

== 0.0.1: 2009-04-30

* Initial release!
