h1. README

h2. Name

Rroonga

h2. Description

Ruby bindings for Groonga that provide full text search and
column store features.

Rroonga is an extension library to use Groonga's DB-API
layer. Rroonga provides Rubyish readable and writable API
not C like API. You can use Groonga's fast and highly
functional features from Ruby with Rubyish form.

See the following URL about Groonga.

* "The Groonga official site":http://groonga.org/

h2. Authors

* Kouhei Sutou <kou@clear-code.com>
* Tasuku SUENAGA <a@razil.jp>
* Daijiro MORI <morita@razil.jp>
* Yuto HAYAMIZU <y.hayamizu@gmail.com>
* SHIDARA Yoji <dara@shidara.net>
* yoshihara haruka <yoshihara@clear-code.com>

h2. License

LGPL 2.1. See license/LGPL for details.

(Kouhei Sutou has a right to change the license including
contributed patches.)

h2. Dependencies

* Ruby >= 1.9.3
* Groonga >= 3.0.8

h2. Install

<pre>
!!!command_line
% sudo gem install rroonga
</pre>

h2. Documents

* "Reference manual in English":http://ranguba.org/rroonga/en/
* "Reference manual in Japanese":http://ranguba.org/rroonga/ja/

h2. Mailing list

* English: "groonga-talk":http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/groonga-talk
* Japanese: "groonga-dev":http://lists.sourceforge.jp/mailman/listinfo/groonga-dev

h2. Thanks

* Daijiro MORI: sent patches to support the latest Groonga.
* Tasuku SUENAGA: sent bug reports.
* niku: sent bug reports.
* dara:
** wrote tests.
** fixed bugs.
* id:mat_aki: sent bug reports.
* @yune_kotomi: sent a bug report.
* m_seki: sent bug reports.
* ono matope: sent bug reports.
* @kamipo: send a bug report.
* ongaeshi: sent a patch to build gem on Windows.
* mallowlabs: send a patch.
