h1. NEWS

h2(#4-0-6). 4.0.6: 2014-11-06

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 4.0.7. [GitHub#28]
** Changed {Groonga::Context#support_lzo?} always returns @false@.
** Added {Groonga::Context#support_lz4?}.
** Supported @:lz4@ in {Groonga::Table#define_column} options.
** Supported @:lz4@ in {Groonga::VariableSizeColumn#compressed?} options.
** Added {Groonga::LZ4Error}.
** Added {Groonga::TokenFilterError}.
** [grndump] Supported @COMPRESS_ZLIB@ and @COMPRESS_LZ4@ flags.
* Added {Groonga::Expression#keywords}. [GitHub#30]
* Stopped to require logger object as the first argument of
  {Groonga::Logger.register} when block is specified.

h3. Fixes

* [doc] Removed deprecated example.
  [GitHub#26] [Patch by ongaeshi]
* Fixed a bug that a column assignment raises an error when
  you assign value with type A and then assign value type B again.
  [GitHub#27] [Patch by Daisuke Goto]
* Fixed a memory leak in {Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_near_cursor}.
* Fixed a bug that you can access a column renamed by
  {Groonga::Column#rename} with old name.
  [GitHub#29] [Patch by Daisuke Goto]
* [doc] Fixed wrong option name of {Groonga::Logger.register}.

h3. Thanks

* ongaeshi
* Daisuke Goto

h2(#4-0-5). 4.0.5: 2014-10-05

h3. Improvements

* [windows] Added cross build task.
* Added {Groonga::DoubleArrayTrie#update}.
  [GitHub#24] [Patch by Masafumi Yokoyama]
* Added {Groonga::Record#rename}.
* [windows] Disabled debug flags.

h3. Fixes

* Added @:id => true@ option to {Groonga::Table::KeySupport#delete}.
  @Groonga::Table::KeySupport#delete@ accepts both ID and key. If passed
  value is integer, it is handled as ID. But we can use @Int32@ as key.
  In the case, we can't delete a record by key. Therefore, we added
  @Groonga::Table::KeySupport#delete(id, :id => true)@ API. It introduces
  a backward incompatibility, but it is OK because the current API is a
  bug.

h3. Thanks

* Masafumi Yokoyama

h2(#4-0-4). 4.0.4: 2014-08-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 4.0.4 or later. Groonga 4.0.3 or older are not supported.
* Added {Groonga::ProcedureType} that has constants as GRN_PROC_XXX.
* Added {Groonga::Procedure#type} as grn_proc_get_type().
  <pre>
  procedure = Groonga["TokenBigram"]
  p procedure.type == Groonga::ProcedureType::TOKENIZER  #=> true
  </pre>
* Avoided a crash when {Groonga::Record#inspct} is called on exit.
  [GitHub#18] [Reported by Ippei Obayashi]
* Updated Free Software Foundation address. [Masafumi Yokoyama]
* Supported reference weight vector. It requires Groonga 4.0.4 or later.
* Updated homepage in gemspec to use ranguba.org. [Masafumi Yokoyama]
* Reduce memory usage without GC.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a GC related crash when GC is run while {Groonga::Table#group}.

h3. Thanks

* Ippei Obayashi
* uu59
* cosmo0920

h2(#4-0-3). 4.0.3: 2014-06-04

h3. Fixes

* [windows] Fixed a bug that Rroonga reports load error by
  bundling the fixed version Groonga package.
  [groonga-dev,02398][Reported by Masafumi Yokoyama]

h3. Thanks

* Masafumi Yokoyama

h2(#4-0-2). 4.0.2: 2014-05-29

h3. Improvements

* Removed needless @--key_type@ option in dump.
  [Reported by Genki Takiuchi]
* Added sources information to {Groonga::IndexColumn#inspect}.
* Enabled @with_section@ flag for multiple column index by default.
  See {Groonga::Schema::TableDefinition#index}.
* Enabled @with_position@ flag for index of a table that has a default
  tokenizer by default. You need to specify @:with_position => false@
  explicitly to disable @with_position@ flag for @TokenDelimit@.
  @TokenDelimit@ is a tokenizer that doesn't need @with_position@ flag.
  See {Groonga::Schema.create_table}.

h3. Fixes

* [GitHub#16] Fixed a memory leak of {Groonga::Table#column}.
  [Reported by rutice]

h3. Thanks

* rutice
* Genki Takiuchi

h2(#4-0-1). 4.0.1: 2014-04-04

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 4.0.1. Groonga 4.0.0 or older are not supported.
* Supported no weight match column case.
  <pre>
  table.select do |record|
    match_target = record.match_target do |target|
      target.column
    end
    match_target =~ keyword
  end
  </pre>
* Supported weight vector.
* grndump: Changed to use @--normalizer@ instead of @KEY_NORMALIZE@.
  Old Groonga can't restore dumped database.
* {Groonga::IndexClumn#search}: Added @mode@ option.
* {Groonga::IndexClumn#search}: Added @weight@ option.
* Accepted String as option key.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a bug that index dump drops index options in Ruby syntax.


h2(#4-0-0). 4.0.0: 2014-02-09

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 4.0.0. Groonga 3.1.2 or older are not supported.
* Added install document. [Patch by ongaeshi]

h3. Thanks

* ongaeshi


h2(#3-1-2). 3.1.2: 2014-01-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 3.1.2. Groonga 3.1.1 or older are not supported.
* Added {Groonga::Table#support_value?}.
* Added {Groonga::Record#support_value?}.
* Added @_value@ value to {Groonga::Record#attributes} result.
  [groonga-dev,02046] [Suggested by ongaeshi]
* Added column values to {Groonga::Record#inspect} result.
  [groonga-dev,02048] [Suggested by ongaeshi]
* grndump: Added @--dump-indexes@ option that controls schema for
  indexes output. It is useful to dump only schema for indexes.
* Added {Groonga.lock_timeout}.
* Added {Groonga.lock_timeout=}.

h3. Thanks

* ongaeshi

h2(#3-1-1). 3.1.1: 2013-12-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 3.1.1.
* [groonga-database-inspect]: Added @--no-tables@ option for hiding
  all table information.
* [groonga-database-inspect]: Added @--no-columns@ option for hiding
  all column information.
* [doc] Updated English mailing list to use Groonga-talk.
  [GitHub#14] [Patch by Masafumi Yokoyama]
* {Groonga::Expression#append_operation} supports operator name.
* {Groonga::Expression#append_constant} supports operator name.
* {Groonga::Expression#append_object} supports operator name.

h3. Thanks

* Masafumi Yokoyama

h2(#3-1-0). 3.1.0: 2013-11-29

h3. Improvements

* Reduced build failure by automatically Groonga build.
  [Reported by SHIMADA Koji]
* Added @groonga-database-inspect@ command that inspects passed database.
  [Suggested by Genki Takiuchi]
* {Groonga::Database#tables} ignores missing objects rather than raising
  an exception. Because the method is interested in only existing tables.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a bug that {Groonga::Expression#parse} doesn't accept all
  mode and operators.

h3. Thanks

* SHIMADA Koji
* Genki Takiuchi

h2(#3-0-9). 3.0.9: 2013-10-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported Groonga 3.0.9.
* Supported showing error message on error in {Groonga::Object#remove}.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a crash bug that is caused by assigning @nil@ as source of
  index column.

h2(#3-0-8). 3.0.8: 2013-09-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 3.0.8.
* Supported x64-mingw32 Ruby.
* Supported Ruby 2.1.0 preview1.

h2(#3-0-7). 3.0.7: 2013-09-19

h3. Improvements

* Added {Groonga::Table::KeySupport#tokenize}. It requires groonga
  3.0.8. Groonga 3.0.8 is not released yet.
* Changed return object of {Groonga::Context#select} to groonga-client gem's
  return object. It is a backward imcompatible change. Some APIs are changed.
  For example, @drill_down@ is renamed to @drilldowns@. See
  "Groonga::Client::Response::Select":http://rubydoc.info/gems/groonga-client/Groonga/Client/Response/Select
  about rerturn object details.
** Added groonga-client gem, groogna-command gem, gqtp gem dependencies.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a bug that auto groonga installation is failed.
  [GitHub#12][Patch by Keita Haga]

h3. Thanks

* Keita Haga

h2(#3-0-6). 3.0.6: 2013-09-13

h3. Improvements

* Supported accessing reference column that referes a table that uses
  Int8/UInt8/Int16/UInt16 key.

h2(#3-0-5). 3.0.5: 2013-07-29

h3. Improvements

* [dumper] supported dumping of DoubleArrayTrie.
* Supported Int8/UInt8/Int16/UInt16 to Ruby conversion.
  [groonga-dev,01524][Reported by Masaharu YOSHIOKA]
* Added memory pool mechanism to reduce GC easily.
  {Groonga::Context#push_memory_pool} and {Groonga::Context#pop_memory_pool}
  are added.
  You can close temporary table objects automatically:
  <pre>
  context.push_memory_pool do
    # create tempoeray table objects by select, group, sort and so on...
  end
  # createed tempoeray table objects are closed automatically
  </pre>
* Supported max int32 over Fixnum
  [Reported by xtuaok]

h3. Fixes

* [dumper] fixed a bug that no column table isn't dumped.

h3. Thanks

* Masaharu YOSHIOKA
* xtuaok

h2(#3-0-4). 3.0.4: 2013-07-04

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a rroogna 3.0.3 gem package for Windows.

h2(#3-0-3). 3.0.3: 2013-07-04

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga >= 3.0.5.
* Added an error check for creating a result table of {Groonga::Table#select}.
* Added {Groonga::Operator::AND_NOT}.
* Deprecated {Groonga::Operator::BUT} because groonga deprecated it.
  Use {Groonga::Operator::AND_NOT} instead.
* Added {Groonga::Array#unblock}.
* Added @:max_n_sub_records@ option to {Groonga::Table#group}.
* Added {Groonga::Table#each_sub_record}.
* Supported groonga to Ruby conversion for vector value.
* Added @:reference => true@ option to {Groonga::Expression#define_variable}
  that defines reference type variable.
* Added {Groonga::Record#sub_records} that returns sub records for the record.
  Sub records is a {Groonga::SubRecords} instance.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed {Groonga::Expression#[]} return type. It returns {Groonga::Variable}
  instead of value itself. CAUTION: It is a backward incompatible change.

h2(#3-0-2). 3.0.2: 2013-05-29

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga >= 3.0.4.
* Supported set/get a vector of Time.
* [grndump] Stopped to dump index only tables. They are needless.
* Added {Groonga::Record#to_json}.
* Added {Groonga::IndexColumn#add}.
* Added {Groonga::IndexColumn#delete}.
* Added {Groonga::IndexColumn#update}.
* Deprecated {Groonga::IndexColumn#[]=}. Use {Groonga::IndexColumn#add},
  {Groonga::IndexColumn#delete} or {Groonga::IndexColumn#update} instead.
* Added {Groonga::Table#have_n_sub_records_space?}.
* [grndump] Don't dump "register PLUGIN" when schema dump is disabled.

h3. Fixes

* [grndump]
  Fixed a bug that reference tables may be dumpped before referenced tables.

h2(#3-0-1). 3.0.1: 2013-05-01

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga >= 3.0.3.
* Supported assigning weight to value. See {Groonga::Table#set_column_value},
  {Groonga::Record#initialize} and {Groonga::Record#[]=} for details.
* Renamed to {Groonga::QueryLogger.path} from {Groonga::Logger.query_log_path}.
* Renamed to {Groonga::QueryLogger.path=} from {Groonga::Logger.query_log_path=}.
* Renamed to {Groonga::Logger.path} from {Groonga::Logger.log_path}.
* Renamed to {Groonga::Logger.path=} from {Groonga::Logger.log_path=}.
* Added missing "Packnga >= 0.9.7" requirement. [Reported by takkanm]

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a memory leak on error.

h3. Thanks

* takkanm

h2(#3-0-0). 3.0.0: 2013-03-29

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga >= 3.0.2.
* Added block support to {Groonga::Context#create_database}. If a
  block is given, created database is closed on block exit.
* [experimental] Added {Groonga::Array#push}.
* [experimental] Added {Groonga::Array#pull}.
* Added more closed object checks.
  [GitHub #8][Reported by KITAITI Makoto]
* Added block support to {Groonga::Context#restore}. If a block is
  given, command and its response are yielded.

h3. Thanks

* KITAITI Makoto

h2(#2-1-3). 2.1.3: 2013-01-29

h3. Improvements

* Removed Groonga::View removed in groonga 2.1.2.
* [doc] Added tutorial in English.
** for English:http://ranguba.org/rroonga/en/file.tutorial.html
** for Japanese:http://ranguba.org/rroonga/ja/file.tutorial.html
* [context] Added Context#restore. This method restores command dumped
  by "grndump" command. Please see example below:
<pre>
!!!ruby
dumped_commands = File.read("dump.grn")
context.restore(dumped_commands)
</pre>
* Supported new logger API in groonga. Old API isn't used anymore.
* For installing groonga with this gem:
** Stopped to install documentation about groonga. See "Web site":http://groonga.org/docs/ instead.
** Stopped to build static library because it isn't used by rroonga.

h3. Fixes

* [dumper] Reduced needless new lines in dumped commands.

* For ranguba project:
** [template] Removed needless block for sponsor by rubyforge.
** [template] Removed needless piwik tag.
** [template] Fixed URLs of references in Japanese.

h2(#2-1-2). 2.1.2: 2013-01-04

h3. Fixes

* Fixed GC related crash. Table's domain and range are also marked.

h2(#2-1-1). 2.1.1: 2012-12-29

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga 2.1.1 because groonga 2.1.0 has a serious bug
  related to key normalization.

h2(#2-1-0). 2.1.0: 2012-12-29

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga 2.1.0.
* Supported mass record deletion with block.
  [groonga-dev,01138][Suggested by ongaeshi]
* Added Groonga::Normalizer.normalize (experimental). It normalize string.
  e.g.)
    Groonga::Normalizer.normalize("AbC") # => "abc"
  Now, it removes any spaces by default, but it will be customized soon.
* Supported :normalizer option in DoubleArrayTrie, PatriciaTrie, Hash,
  Schema when creating tables.
* [table] Added using normalizer accessor.
* [table] Used normalizer for checking key normalization is enabled or not.
* Added groonga-index-dump tool (experimental).
  This tool dumps infomations for each index from DB.
  Dumped informations are contained at "INDEX_NAME.dump" files in
  "TARGET_TABLE_NAME.index_INDEX_COLUMN_NAME".
  e.g.)

  <pre>
   $ cat index-dump.sdf
     table_create --name Video --flags TABLE_HASH_KEY --key_type UInt32
     table_create --name Tag --flags TABLE_HASH_KEY --key_type ShortText
     column_create --table Video --name title --flags COLUMN_SCALAR --type ShortText
     column_create --table Video --name tags --flags COLUMN_VECTOR --type Tag
     column_create --table Tag --name index_tags --flags COLUMN_INDEX --type Video --source tags
     load --table Video
     [
     {"_key":1,"title":"groonga Demo","tags":["IT","Server","groonga"]},
     {"_key":2,"title":"Ultra Baseball","tags":["Sports","Baseball"]},
     ]
  $ groonga --file index-dump.sdf -n index-dump.db
  $ groonga-index-dump --output-directory=path/to/index/ index-dump.db
  $ cd path/to/index/
  $ ls Tag.index_tags
    Baseball.dump  IT.dump       Server.dump  Sports.dump  groonga.dump
  $ cat path/to/index/Tag.index_tags/groonga.dump
    index: Tag.index_tags	term: <groonga>	domain: Tag	range: Video	have_section: false	have_weight: false	have_position: false
     weight	position        term_frequency	record
     0    2     1   Video[ 1 ].tags
  </pre>

* Added flag options to Groonga::IndexColumn#open_cursor.
  The flag options are :with_section, :with_weight, :with_position.
  They are enabled by default if each option is specified in creating
  a index column.
* [Snippet] Showed the error message when specified context wasn't
  associated with a database by Groonga::Database#open or #create.
* [inspect] Supported to display index column related flags for index
  column only.
  "index column related flags" are WITH_SECTION, WITH_WEIGHT and
  WITH_POSITION.
* [inspect] Added default tokenizer and normalizer infomation.
* Supported Groonga::QueryLogger. This class is used to log query log.
  Please see its reference for detail.

h3. Changes

* Move groonga-query-log-extract to groonga-query-log.
  Please install groogna-query-log gem to use this tool.
  how to install:
      gem install groonga-query-log
* Returned Groonga::Array instead of Array by Table#sort.
  [GitHub: #8][Suggested by Genki Takiuchi]
  CAUTION: This is backward incompatible change. You need to use
  record.value to get the original record.
  The following code shows how to use old style:
    result_since_2_1_0 = table.sort(["sort_key"])
    result_before_2_1_0 = result_since_2_1_0.collect do |record|
      record.value
    end

h3. Thanks

* ongaeshi
* Genki Takiuchi

h2(#2-0-8). 2.0.8: 2012-12-02

h3. Improvements

* Required groonga 2.0.9.

h2(#2-0-7). 2.0.7: 2012-11-29

h3. Improvements

* Added Groonga::Posting#record. This method returns the record for
  the record ID in table.
* Added Groonga::Posting#term. This method returns the record for the
  term ID in table.
* Supported GRN_OBJ_KEY_VAR_SIZE for Groonga::Type#inspect.
  GRN_OBJ_KEY_CAR_SIZE specifies its column is variable size.
* [Type] Added reader methods to Groonga::Type (#size and #flags).
* [Type] Added predicate methods to Groonga::Type.
  Added methods are #fixed_size?, #variable_size?, #unsigned_integer?,
  #integer?, #float? and #geo_point?.

h3. Changes

* Removed query log related codes.
  This feature moved to groonga-query-log gem and it is relased soon.

h2(#2-0-6). 2.0.6: 2012-10-25

h3. Improvements

* [dump] Put index columns at the bottom (after loads).
  It is for using offline index construction.
* Added term_extract in Table#select by @table.select {|record|
  record.key.term_extract(text)}@ syntax.
* Supported :allow_leading_not as a option of #select.
  You should use this option carefully. It takes a long time to search
  all records which doesn't include a word. In addition, when the
  number of records is large, to search them with this option is
  slowly.

h3. Changes

* Changed option name for debug build in extconf.rb from --with-debug
  to --enable-debug-log.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed display collapse in the references.

h2(#2-0-5). 2.0.5: 2012-09-28

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 2.0.7.
* Removed the workaround to install rroonga with old groonga.
* Added more error checks.
* Added Database#tables. [Suggested by @temitan]
* Supported Enumerator for #each on Database, Table, TableCursor and
  IndexCursor.
* Added WGS84GeoPoint and TokyoGeoPoint.
* [dumper] supported dumping of WGS84GeoPoint and TokyoGeoPoint.
* [dumper] worked on non UTF-8 extenal output encoding environment.
* [dumper] sorted table and column names.
* [dumper] ignored invalid byte.
* [grndump] showed the warning for invalid character.
* [grndump] supported database that is created by old groonga.
* Added Groonga::Context#ruby_encoding.
* Added many documents in codes but showed no references.

h3. Fixes

* Added missing backslash escape for groonga command.

h3. Thanks

* @temitan

h2(#2-0-4). 2.0.4: 2012-05-02

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a bug that weight of match target is ignored.

h2(#2-0-3). 2.0.3: 2012-05-02

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 2.0.2.
* Groonga::Table#each supports options that are same as
  Groonga::Table#open_cursor's one.
* [grndump] added @--order-by=id@ option. With this option, dumped
  records are sorted by ID instead of key. You can restore records
  without ID change if you don't delete any records. [#1341]
* Supported building on Windows with RubyInstaller for Windows with DevKit.
  [GitHub#6] [Patch by @ongaeshi]
* Supported similar search by @table.select {|record|
  record.column.similar_search(text)}@ syntax.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a GC related crach bug.

h3. Thanks

* @ongaeshi

h2(#2-0-2). 2.0.2: 2012-03-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 2.0.1.
* Added "logos":http://groonga.rubyforge.org/#logo .

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a Groonga::Snipet related crach bug caused by GC.

h2(#2-0-0). 2.0.0: 2012-03-22

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 2.0.0.
* [gem][windows] Removed mswin packages.

h3. Fixes

* [test] Fixed version test failure. [GitHub#4] [Reported by @takkanm]
* Fixed a Groonga::Expression related crach bug caused by GC.
* [doc] Fixed broken HTML output. [groonga-dev,00699]
  [Reported by Hirano]

h3. Thanks

* @takkanm
* Hirano

h2(#1-3-1). 1.3.1: 2012-01-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.3.0.
* [schema] Supported Int8, Int16, UInt8 and UInt16.
* [schema] Supported TokyoGeoPoint and WGS84GeoPoint.
* [schema][dumper] Supported Boolean and more built-in types.
  [Reported by @mashiro]
* [schema] Supported type object as column type. [#1002]
* Added Groonga::VariableSizeColumn#compressed?. [#1004]
* Added Groonga::Record#score=.
* Improve performance for encoded string.
* Added Groonga::Command::Builder.escape_value.

h3. Thanks

* @mashiro

h2(#1-3-0). 1.3.0: 2011-11-29

h3. Improvements

* [schema] Remove also needless db.tables/ directory if it is empty.
* [schema] Remove also needless db.tables/table.columns/ directory if it is empty.
* Added query log parser.
* Added groonga-query-log-extract command.
* Added grntest log analyzer.
* Added JSON gem dependency.
* Supported groonga 1.2.8.
* Dropped groonga 1.2.7 or former support.
* Added Groonga::Table#defrag.
* Added Groonga::Table#rename.
* Added Groonga::Column#rename.
* Added Groonga::DoubleArrayTrie.
* [schema] Supported table rename.
* [schema] Supported column rename.
* [schema] Supported double array trie.

h3. Changes

* [schema] Don't use named path by default for location aware DB.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a crash problem on GC.

h2. 1.2.9: 2011-09-16

h3. Fixes

* deleted unneed object files.

h2. 1.2.8: 2011-09-16

h3. Improvements

* supported "!=" expression for column in block of Groonga::Table#select.
* accepted Hash like object as options.
* supported vector in dump in Ruby syntax.
* supported GRN_CTX_PER_DB environment variables.
(NOTE: You should pay attention to use this variables.)

h2. 1.2.7: 2011-08-29

h3. Improvements

* Added Groonga::Snippet#close that frees resource.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed build error on Ruby 1.8.7.

h2. 1.2.6: 2011-08-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.2.5.
* Added Groonga::Record#added? that returns true when the record is just added.
* Added Groonga::VariableSizeColumn#defrag? that defrags the column.
* Added Groonga::Database#defrag that defrags the all variable size columns.
* Supported column name specification by symbol.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed install *.rb failure by gem install.
* Fixed some memory leaks.
* Fixed crash bug on exit.

h2. 1.2.5: 2011-08-05

h3. Improvements

* Re-supported tar.gz distribution.
* Added Groonga::Context#close.
* Added Groonga::Context#closed?.
* Deprecated Groonga::ObjectClosed. Use Groonga::Closed instead.
* grndump: Added --exclude-table option that specifies not dumped tables.
* dump: Removed path equality check.

h3. Fixes

* dump: Fixed wrong index table type.
* Re-supported auto groonga install.

h2. 1.2.4: 2011-06-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.2.3.

h3. Fixes

* Re-supported auto groonga install.
* Added missing pkg-config gem dependency.

h2. 1.2.3: 2011-06-27

h3. Fixes

* remove object files in gem packages.
* fix charactor corruption in reference.

h2. 1.2.2: 2011-06-27

h3. Improvements

* created "Developers" page in English.
* added description for tasks of "html:publish" and "publish".

h3. Changes

* Groonga::Record#attributes return same attributes object for duplicate records.
* added document for Groonga::Record#attributes.
* changed tool name in document page for creating document.
* moved NEWS*.rdoc and tutorial.texttile to doc/text/.

h3. Fixes

* fixed the tutorial path in index page.
* fixed the path of tutorial in index page in English.
* follow the groonga downlowd URL change. [mallowlabs]

h3. Thanks

* mallowlabs

h2. 1.2.1: 2011-06-07

h3. Improvements

* added document of Groonga::Table#pagination.
* added grndump in package.
* corresponded recursive reference of Records by Groonga::Record#attributes.
  (experimental) [mooz]
* Groonga::Record#attributes supported data including _score.
* corresponded Windows for 64-bit.
  (but there's not 64-bit ruby, so rroonga for 64-bit windows cannot run.)
* added Groonga::Posting.
* added :delimit, :token_delimiter for alias of TokenDelimit.
* Groonga::DatabaseDumper#dump corresponded lexicon table.
* Groonga::DatabaseDumper#dump corresponded data including plugin.
* added Groonga::IndexColumn#open_cursor. [yoshihara]
* added Groonga::IndexCursor. [yoshihara]
* added Groonga::Object#builtin?. [yoshihara]

h3. Changes

* check existence of column before removing it.
* removed grn expression document.

h3. Thanks

* mooz
* yoshihara

h2. 1.2.0: 2011-04-01

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.2.0.
* Added Groonga::Accessor#local_name.
* Added Groonga::IndexColumn#with_section?.
* Added Groonga::IndexColumn#with_weight?.
* Added Groonga::IndexColumn#with_position?.
* Groonga::Schema.dump supported groonga command format dump.
* Added grndump command.
* Groonga::Database#each supports order customize.
* Added Groonga::Context#match_escalation_threshold.
* Added Groonga::Context#match_escalation_threshold=.
* Improved error message.
* Supported Rubyish name like :short_text instead of the
  official type name like "ShortText" in Groonga::Schema.

h2. 1.1.0: 2011-02-09

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.1.0.
* Added Groonga::Plugin.register.

h2. 1.0.9: 2011-01-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported gem creation on Windows. [Patch by ongaeshi]
* Supported generated directory that is created by Groonga::Schema removal
  when table or column is removed.
* Added Groonga::Context#create_database.
* Added Groonga::Context#open_database.
* Added Groonga::Column#indexes.
* Supported a notation for specifying index column as match target in
  Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.match("query") do |match_record|
        (match_record.index("Terms.title") * 1000) |
          (match_record.index("Terms.description") * 100)
          match_record.content
      end
    end
* Supported prefix search in Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.name.prefix_search("groo")
    end
* Supported suffix search in Groonga::Table#select:
    table.select do |record|
      record.name.suffix_search("nga")
    end
* Supported :default_tokenizer schema dump.
* Supported :key_normalize schema dump.
* Supported pseudo columns by Groonga::Table#have_column?.
* Supported pseudo columns by Groonga::Record#have_column?.

h3. Changes

* Renamed Groonga::Operatoion to Groonga::Operator.
  (Groonga::Operation is deprecated but still usable.)

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a crash bug when not default Groonga::Context is used in
  Groonga::Table#select.
* Fixed a crash bug when an exception is occurred.

h3. Thanks

* ongaeshi

h2. 1.0.8: 2010-12-25

h3. Improvements

* Improved Groonga::Schema's n-gram tokenizer detect process.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed GC problem caused by match_target in select.

h2. 1.0.7: 2010-12-19

h3. Fixes

* Supported pkg-config installed by RubyGems on Ruby 1.8. [Reported by @kamipo]
* Fixed a memory leak in Groonga::Table#columns.

h3. Thanks

* @kamipo

h2. 1.0.5: 2010-11-29

h3. Improvements

* Added snail_case type name aliases for built-in groonga types
  to Groonga::Schema.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed a crash bug on GC. [Ryo Onodera]

h2. 1.0.4: 2010-11-29

h3. Improvements

* Supported groonga 1.0.4.
  * Added Groonga::UnsupportedCommandVersion.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_sub_records?.
* Added Groonga::Record#eql?とGroonga::Record#hash.
  (treat two the same table and the same record ID object as the same Hash key.)
* Supported pkg-config gem.
* Supported generic #record_id object handle for custom record object
  in Groonga::Table#select.
* Added Groonga::Record#record_id.
* Added Groonga::Table#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Record#support_key?.
* Added Groonga::Column#reference_key?.
* Added Groonga::Column#index_column?.
* Added Groonga::Schema#dump.
* Supported multi columns index creation in Groonga::Schema.
* Supported meaningful path in Groonga::Schema.
* Made reference table omissible when index column definition
  in Groonga::Schema.
* Added Groonga::Schema.remove_column.
* Added convenience timestamps methods to define "created_at" and
  "updated_at" columns in Groonga::Schema.
* Added Groonga::Context#support_zlib?.
* Added Groonga::Context#support_lzo?.
* Added Groonga::Database#touch.
* Added Groonga::Table#exist?.
* Added Groonga::Record#valid?.
* Added Groonga::Column#vector?.
* Added Groonga::Column#scalar?.
* Added Groonga::Record#vector_column?.
* Added Groonga::Record#scalar_column?.
* Accepted any object that has record_raw_id method for record ID required
  location. Groonga::Record isn't required.
* Added Groonga::Record#record_raw_id.
* Accepted any object that as to_ary method for reference vector column value.

h2. Changes

* Used :key as the default value of :order_by of
  Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_cursor.
* Removed a deprecated Groonga::TableKeySupport#find.
* Used ShortText as the default key type of
  Groonga::Hash#create and Groonga::PatriciaTrie#create.
* Renamed Groonga::Schema#load to Groonga::Schema#restore.
* Supported pkg-confg 1.0.7.
* Added Groonga::Column#index? and deprecated Groonga::Column#index_column?.
* Added Groonga::Column#reference? and deprecated
  Groonga::Column#reference_column?.

h3. Fixes

* Fixed index for key isn't be able to define.
* Fixed a crash problem on GC.

h2. 1.0.1: 2010-09-12

h3. Fixes

* Fixed wrong flag used on creating a table. [Reported by ono matope]

h3. Thanks

* ono matope

h2. 1.0.0: 2010-08-29

* Supported groonga 1.0.0.
  * Added Groonga::CASError.
  * Added :order_by option to Groonga::Table#open_cursor.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_prefix_cursor that creates a cursor
    to retrieve each records by prefix search.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_rk_cursor that creats a cursor to
    retrieve katakana keys from roman letters and/or hiragana.
  * Added Groonga::PatriciaTrie#open_near_cursor that creates a cursor to
    retrieve records order by distance from key.
* Supported _key as index source.

h2. 0.9.5: 2010-07-20

* Supported groonga 0.7.4.
* Imporoved Groonga::Table#select:
  * Supported weight match:

    Here is an example to match source column or title column and
    title column has high score:
      table.select do |record|
        (record.title * 10 | record.source) =~ "query"
      end
  * Supported and representation for and conditions:

    Here are examples that represents the same condition:
      table.select do |record|
        conditions = []
        conditions << record.title =~ "query"
        conditions << record.updated_at > Time.parse("2010-07-29T21:14:29+09:00")
        conditions
      end

      table.select do |record|
        (record.title =~ "query") &
          (record.updated_at > Time.parse("2010-07-29T21:14:29+09:00"))
      end
* Provided groonga runtime version: Groonga::VERSION
* Added Groonga::Table#support_sub_records?
* Supported pagination: Groonga::Table#paginate, Groonga::Pagination

h2. 0.9.4: 2010-04-22

* Fixed release miss.

h2. 0.9.3: 2010-04-22

* Fixed release miss.

h2. 0.9.2: 2010-04-22

* Supported groonga 0.1.9.
* Many.

h2. 0.9.1: 2010-02-09

* Supported groonga 0.1.6

h2. 0.9.0: 2010-02-09

* Supported groonga 0.1.5
* Added API
  * Groonga::Object#context
  * Groonga::Record#n_sub_records
  * Groonga::Context#send
  * Groonga::Context#receive
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#prefix_search [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#path [Ryo Onodera]
  * Groonga::Object#lock [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#unlock [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#locked? [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Groonga::Object#temporary?
  * Groonga::Object#persistent?
  * Groonga::ObjectClosed
  * Groonga::Context.[]
  * Groonga::Table#column_value
  * Groonga::Table#set_column_value
* Changed API
  * Groonga::Table#select, Groonga::Column#select
    * They also accept Groonga::Expression
    * Added :syntax option that specifies grn expression syntax
  * Groonga::Table#open_cursor
    * Added :offset option that specifies offset.
    * Added :limit option that specifies max number of records.
  * Changed Groonga::Expression.parse options:
    * (nil (default) -> :column) -> (nil (default) -> :query)
    * :column -> removed
    * :table -> :query
    * :table_query -> :query
    * :expression -> :script
    * :language -> :script
  * Groonga::Table#define_column, Groonga::Table#define_index_column
    * Defined column becomes persistent table by default
  * Groonga::Table#[] -> Groonga::Table#value
  * Groonga::Table#[]= -> Groonga::Table#set_value
  * Groonga::Table#find -> Groonga::Table#[]
  * Groonga::Table#find -> obsolete
  * Groonga::Table#[]= -> removed
  * Groonga::TableKeySupport#[]= is alias of Groonga::TableKeySupport#add
  * Changed exception class to Groonga::NoSuchColumn from
    Groonga::InvalidArgument when Groonga::Record accesses nonexistent
    a column.
* Bug fixes
  * Fixed a bug that context isn't passed to schema [dara]
  * Fixed a bug that Groonga::PatriciaTrie#tag_keys doesn't return
    that last text. [Ryo Onodera]
* Added --with-debug option to extconf.rb for debug build.
* Fixed a bug that Ruby 1.9.1 may fail extconf.rb.

h3. Thanks

* dara
* Ryo Onodera
* Tasuku SUENAGA

h2. 0.0.7: 2009-10-02

* Supported groonga 0.1.4
* Added API
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#scan
  * Groonga::PatriciaTrie#tag_keys
  * Groonga::Expression#snippet
  * Groonga::Object#append
  * Groonga::Object#prepend

h2. 0.0.6: 2009-07-31

* Supported groonga 0.1.1.
* Fixed documents [id:mat_aki]
* Supported groonga expression for searching.
* Added API
  * Groonga::Table#union!
  * Groonga::Table#intersect!
  * Groonga::Table#differene!
  * Groonga::Table#merge!
* Provided tar.gz [id:m_seki]
* Fixed memory leaks

h2. 0.0.3: 2009-07-18

* Added Groonga::TableKeySupport#has_key? [#26145] [Tasuku SUENAGA]
* Groonga::Record#[] raises an exception for nonexistent
  column name. [#26146] [Tasuku SUENAGA]
* Supported 32bit environment [niku]
* Added a test for N-gram index search [dara]
* Added APIs
  * Groonga::Record#incemrent!
  * Groonga::Record#decemrent!
  * Groonga::Record#lock
  * Groonga::Table#lock
  * Groonga::Schema: A DSL for schema definition
  * Groonga::Expression

h2. 0.0.2: 2009-06-04

* Supported groonga 0.0.8 [mori]
* Improved preformance: cache key, value, domain and range
* Improved API
* Added documents
* Supported Ruby 1.9
* Bug fixes:
  * Fixed install process [Tasuku SUENAGA]
  * Fixed memory leaks

h2. 0.0.1: 2009-04-30

* Initial release!
